FlowFuse 2.31 release blog post (draft) (#5114)
FlowFuse/website: src/blog/2026/06/flowfuse-release-2-31.md

description: "In FlowFuse 2.31, FlowFuse Expert builds your industrial application for you, now an open beta on FlowFuse Cloud and Self-Hosted Enterprise, and working on Remote Instances as well as Hosted ones. Plus per-team and per-instance AI controls and real-time platform updates."
date: 2026-06-04
authors: ["dimitrie-hoekstra"]
# image: /blog/2026/06/images/flowfuse-release-2-31.png  # add once the art request asset lands; the file is absent now and 11ty's image step errors on it, so it is omitted (falls back to the default blog tile)
tags:
   - flowfuse
   - news
   - releases
release: "2.31"
# features: block intentionally commented out until featureCatalog wiring is done.
# Wire these once eng authors the changelog entries and product tiering is finalized:
#   - id: ff-expert-application-building   (update existing entry: add 2.31 changelog + self-hosted enterprise)
#     heading: "Let FlowFuse Expert build your industrial application"
#   - id: ai-opt-out                       (new entry; changelog flowfuse#7333; tiering TBD)
#     heading: "Decide Where AI Runs"
#   - id: realtime-platform-updates        (new entry)
#     heading: "Real-Time Platform Updates"

> tldr: "In FlowFuse 2.31 you describe what you want and FlowFuse Expert builds your industrial application for you. It is now an open beta, no longer request-only, on FlowFuse Cloud and for Self-Hosted Enterprise, and it works on Remote Instances as well as Hosted ones. You also get per-team and per-instance control over AI, and instance and team status that updates live. This is a foundational release, with a lot of the work happening under the hood."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tldr: "In FlowFuse 2.31, FlowFuse Expert builds what you describe. Now in open beta, everyone on FlowFuse Cloud has it enabled by default. FlowFuse Expert works for both remote and hosted instances.  This is a foundational release, with a lot of the work happening under the hood."
```

---

> With FlowFuse 2.31 you describe what you want and FlowFuse Expert builds it on your Node-RED workspace for you. It is now an open beta, no longer request-only, on FlowFuse Cloud and for Self-Hosted Enterprise, and it works on Remote Instances as well as Hosted ones. Alongside that, you get granular control over where AI runs and platform status that updates in real time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
FlowFuse Expert moves from closed beta to open beta this release: on by default for FlowFuse Cloud, off by default for Self-Hosted. Describe the flow you want in plain language and Expert builds it for you. We are also introducing Certified Nodes. Every Certified Node comes from a developer with a real track record in their domain, not an anonymous npm publisher, and each one is vetted for reliability, security, and documentation before it ships. After launch, FlowFuse stands behind it, patching CVEs on our own timeline. RTSP, AI, and OPC UA are available now.
```

<!--more-->

## Let FlowFuse Expert build your industrial application {#expert-agentic-ga}

*FlowFuse Expert is our integrated AI assistant across FlowFuse's website, platform, and the immersive Node-RED editor.*

In 2.30 we put agentic application building into soft launch. The idea is simple: tell FlowFuse Expert what you want to build, an OEE dashboard, an MES handover screen, a UNS topic mapping, and it assembles the flow on your workspace for you. Until now you had to request access while we proved it out.

That phase is over. With 2.31, agentic development opens up as an open beta, on FlowFuse Cloud and for Self-Hosted Enterprise. No more requesting access: on FlowFuse Cloud it is switched on for your team, and Self-Hosted Enterprise customers can enable it with a small configuration change (your customer success contact can walk you through it). We are keeping the beta label on while we keep refining it.

> You can now use it on Remote Instances as well as Hosted Instances. Until now agentic development was limited to Hosted Instances. In 2.31 it also works on Remote Instances, so you get the same build-it-for-me experience across both instance types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
FlowFuse Expert is now in open beta. Describe what you want to build, an OEE dashboard, an MES handover screen, A UNS topic mapping, and Expert assembles the flow on your workspace for you. We will keep the beta label on while we refine it, but with 2.31, FlowFuse Cloud teams have it on by _default_. Self-Hosted Enterprise customers can turn it on per team or per instance.

FlowFuse Expert also reaches further this release with the ability to run on remote instances, too. Now you can also get the build-it-for-me experience on remote instances!
```

## Certified nodes for industrial connectivity and AI {#certified-nodes}

> FlowFuse now offers certified nodes: vetted, FlowFuse-supported nodes you can add to your instances. At launch you can get:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Building on Node-RED usually means pulling nodes from npm and trusting an anonymous publisher to keep them secure and maintained. Certified Nodes change that. Each one comes from a developer with a real track record in their domain, and we vet it for reliability, security, and up-to-date documentation before it ships. After launch, FlowFuse stands behind it, patching CVEs on our own timeline. Available now:
```

### RTSP

Bring live video streams into your flows, like camera feeds for monitoring, inspection, or feeding frames into a vision or AI pipeline.

### OPC UA

Connect to your industrial equipment over OPC UA, the standard for talking to PLCs, SCADA systems, and machines on the plant floor.

### AI nodes

Call leading AI models straight from your flows: Anthropic, OpenAI, Gemini, and Ollama for models you run yourself. Other model providers are following soon.

Certified nodes are available to FlowFuse Cloud customers. [Get in touch with sales](/contact-us/?subject=Certified%20Nodes) or your account rep, and we'll enable the ones your team needs.

## Real-Time Platform Updates {#realtime-platform-updates}

Instance and team status now update live. When something changes, you see it right away instead of waiting for the page to catch up on its next refresh.

- **Live instance status** as it changes, no refresh needed
- **Live team updates** as they happen
- A platform that feels more responsive overall

Under the hood we moved from periodic polling to a push-based connection, which also takes load off the backend.

## What else is new?

> - **AI opt-out controls**: switch AI off per team (FlowFuse Cloud and Self-Hosted Enterprise) or per instance (Self-Hosted Enterprise); AI stays opt-in for self-hosted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Control over where AI runs:** FlowFuse Cloud enables AI by default. Toggle it per team. Self-Hosted Enterprise disables it by default, and you can toggle it per team or per instance.
```

- **Custom CA certificates** are now documented for environments that need them.
- **Smaller fixes**: secure (`wss://`) connections to your MQTT broker now work from the editor, and custom packages with uppercase names no longer break pipeline deploys.

## Fresh off our team off-site in Greece

We spent part of this cycle together in Greece for a full-company off-site, and it shaped what you see (and do not yet see) in 2.31.

<!-- PHOTO: group shot of the team in Greece. Swap for ![The FlowFuse team in Greece](/blog/2026/06/images/offsite-team.jpg) once the asset lands. -->

Getting everyone in one place let us do the kind of work that is hard to do day-to-day and fully remote:

- Stepping back to align on where FlowFuse is headed next
- Revamping how we run product, from discovery through to what actually ships in a release
- Resetting our roadmaps so the next releases build on each other rather than pulling in different directions

<!-- PHOTO: working-session / whiteboard shot. Swap for ![Roadmap working session](/blog/2026/06/images/offsite-roadmap.jpg) once the asset lands. -->

> It is also why 2.31 is lighter on big, user-facing features than a typical release, and we are okay with that. A lot of what we shipped this month is foundational, under-the-hood work, the kind that sets up the bigger things we are building toward.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is also why 2.31 is lighter on big, user-facing features than a typical release. A lot of what we shipped this month is foundational, under-the-hood work, the kind that sets up the bigger things we are building toward.
```

subtitle: "FlowFuse Expert can now build your industrial application on both Hosted and Remote Instances, on FlowFuse Cloud and now Self-Hosted Enterprise. Plus per-team and per-instance AI controls and real-time platform updates."
description: "In FlowFuse 2.31, FlowFuse Expert builds your industrial application for you, now an open beta on FlowFuse Cloud and Self-Hosted Enterprise, and working on Remote Instances as well as Hosted ones. Plus per-team and per-instance AI controls and real-time platform updates."
date: 2026-06-04
authors: ["dimitrie-hoekstra"]
# image: /blog/2026/06/images/flowfuse-release-2-31.png  # add once the art request asset lands; the file is absent now and 11ty's image step errors on it, so it is omitted (falls back to the default blog tile)
tags:
   - flowfuse
   - news
   - releases
release: "2.31"
# features + changelog interlinking deferred to a follow-up (stacked) PR, since it depends on the
# 2.31 changelog entries that land with the release. Wire after merge: certified-nodes (entry exists),
# ff-expert-application-building (needs open-beta cloud tier, self-hosted enterprise, and a 2.31 changelog).

> tldr: "FlowFuse 2.31 brings agentic application building to open beta: describe what you want and FlowFuse Expert builds it on your Node-RED workspace. Plus new certified nodes (RTSP, OPC UA, AI) and per-team and per-instance control over AI."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tldr: "FlowFuse 2.31 brings agentic application building to open beta: describe what you want and FlowFuse Expert builds it on your Node-RED workspace. Plus new Certified Nodes (RTSP, OPC UA, AI) and per-team and per-instance control over AI."
```

cta:
  type: contact

>   title: Get FlowFuse Expert and certified nodes enabled for your team

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  title: Get FlowFuse Expert and Certified Nodes enabled for your team
```

>   description: Agentic development is in open beta and certified nodes are available on request. Get in touch and we'll set your team up.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  description: Agentic development is in open beta and Certified Nodes are available on request. Get in touch and we'll set your team up.
```

---

FlowFuse 2.31 lets FlowFuse Expert build your industrial application for you, now in open beta. Describe what you need, and Expert assembles it on your workspace.

<!--more-->

> ## Agentic Development Now in Open Beta {#expert-agentic-ga}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Let FlowFuse Expert build your industrial application {#expert-agentic-ga}
```

Reviewer 2: Maybe with different wording? It's repeated a few times right above this h2.

Title:
FlowFuse 2.31: Agentic Development Now in Open Beta, **FlowFuse Expert Builds Your Industrial App** on Edge Devices

Subtitle:
**FlowFuse Expert can now build your industrial application** on both Hosted and Remote Instances, on FlowFuse Cloud and now Self-Hosted Enterprise. Plus per-team and per-instance AI controls and real-time platform updates.

TLDR:
FlowFuse 2.31 lets **FlowFuse Expert build your industrial application** for you, now in open beta. Describe what you need, and Expert assembles it on your workspace.

*FlowFuse Expert is our integrated AI assistant, in the website, the platform, and the immersive Node-RED editor.*

Describe what you want to build, an OEE dashboard, an MES handover screen, a UNS topic mapping, and FlowFuse Expert assembles the flow on your workspace for you. With 2.31 this moves out of soft launch into an open beta: switched on for your team on FlowFuse Cloud, no request needed. On Self-Hosted Enterprise, [contact us](/contact-us/) to enable it, and new self-hosted customers get it enabled automatically.

It now works on Remote Instances as well as Hosted Instances, so you get the same build-it-for-me experience across both.

> ## Certified nodes for industrial connectivity and AI {#certified-nodes}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Certified Nodes for industrial connectivity and AI {#certified-nodes}
```

- **OPC UA**: connect to your industrial equipment, the standard for talking to PLCs, SCADA systems, and machines on the plant floor.
- **AI nodes**: call leading AI models straight from your flows, with more providers following soon:
  - Anthropic
  - OpenAI
  - Gemini
  - Ollama, for models you run yourself

  These first LLM nodes handle single-shot, text-in/text-out calls; see the [LLM nodes documentation](/node-red/flowfuse/ai/llm-nodes/) for details. Multimodal input, conversation history, and tool calling are planned for follow-up iterations. They join the FlowFuse AI Nodes package we [shipped in 2.23](/changelog/2025/10/onnx-nodes/), which already includes the ONNX Inference, Image Classification, Object Detection, and Image Depth Estimation nodes for running vision and custom models on-device, with no external API calls.

Certified nodes are available to FlowFuse Cloud customers. [Get in touch with sales](/contact-us/?subject=Certified%20Nodes) or your account rep, and we'll enable the ones your team needs.

## What else is new?

> - **Control over where AI runs:** FlowFuse Cloud enables AI by default. Toggle it per team. Self-Hosted Enterprise disables it by default, and you can toggle it per team or per instance.

Author: ```suggestion
- **Control over where AI runs:** FlowFuse Cloud enables FlowFuse Expert by default; toggle it for your team or per instance. On Self-Hosted Enterprise, contact your account representative to enable FlowFuse Expert for your instance. After that, it runs by default, you can turn it off anytime in settings, and you can toggle it per team or per instance.
```

> Certified nodes are available to FlowFuse Cloud customers. [Get in touch with sales](/contact-us/?subject=Certified%20Nodes) or your account rep, and we'll enable the ones your team needs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Certified Nodes are available to FlowFuse Cloud customers. [Get in touch with sales](/contact-us/?subject=Certified%20Nodes) or your account rep, and we'll enable the ones your team needs.
```

- **Custom CA certificates** are now documented for environments that need them.
- **Smaller fixes**: secure (`wss://`) connections to your MQTT broker now work from the editor, and custom packages with uppercase names no longer break pipeline deploys.

## Our team off-site in Greece

We spent part of this cycle together in Greece for a full-company off-site, resetting our roadmaps and how we run product. That is also why 2.31 is lighter on big features: a lot of this month's work is foundational.

> <!-- PHOTO: add the off-site team photo here once the asset lands: ![The FlowFuse team in Greece](/blog/2026/06/images/offsite-team.jpg) -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## A quick note from our team off-site in Greece

We spent part of this cycle together in Greece for a full-company off-site, and it shaped what you see (and do not yet see) in 2.31.

![The FlowFuse team in Greece](/blog/2026/06/images/offsite-team.jpg)

Getting everyone in one place let us reset our roadmaps and how we work, the kind of introspection that is hard to do day-to-day and fully remote. It is also why 2.31 is lighter on big features: a lot of this month went into foundational groundwork for what is coming next. We will share more soon.
```

Reviewer 2: I’d be a little careful about how much space we dedicate to the off-site in a release post.

A brief mention (and a team photo) helps provide context on why this release is lighter and what we’re working towards next. But I’d avoid letting the off-site become a major section of the article, otherwise the focus shifts away from the product and the release itself.

- **AI nodes**: call leading AI models straight from your flows, with more providers following soon:
  - Anthropic
  - OpenAI
  - Gemini
  - Ollama, for models you run yourself

  These first LLM nodes handle single-shot, text-in/text-out calls; see the [LLM nodes documentation](/node-red/flowfuse/ai/llm-nodes/) for details. Multimodal input, conversation history, and tool calling are planned for follow-up iterations. They join the FlowFuse AI Nodes package we [shipped in 2.23](/changelog/2025/10/onnx-nodes/), which already includes the ONNX Inference, Image Classification, Object Detection, and Image Depth Estimation nodes for running vision and custom models on-device, with no external API calls.

Certified nodes are available to FlowFuse Cloud customers. [Get in touch with sales](/contact-us/?subject=Certified%20Nodes) or your account rep, and we'll enable the ones your team needs.

## What else is new?

- **Control over where AI runs:** FlowFuse Cloud enables AI by default. Toggle it per team. Self-Hosted Enterprise disables it by default, and you can toggle it per team or per instance.

> - **Real-time platform updates**: instance and team status now update live, no refresh needed.

Author: ```suggestion
```

Author: was done per review in the eng release call

#     heading: "Let FlowFuse Expert build your industrial application"
#   - id: ai-opt-out                       (new entry; changelog flowfuse#7333; tiering TBD)
#     heading: "Decide Where AI Runs"
#   - id: realtime-platform-updates        (new entry)
#     heading: "Real-Time Platform Updates"
tldr: "FlowFuse 2.31 takes agentic application building into open beta: describe what you want and FlowFuse Expert builds it on your workspace, now on FlowFuse Cloud and Self-Hosted Enterprise, and on Remote as well as Hosted Instances. New certified nodes bring RTSP, OPC UA, and AI models to your flows, and you get per-team and per-instance control over AI. A foundational release, with much of the work under the hood."
---

FlowFuse 2.31 lets FlowFuse Expert build your industrial application for you, now in open beta and running at the edge. Describe what you need, and Expert assembles it on your workspace.

<!--more-->

## Let FlowFuse Expert build your industrial application, now in open beta {#expert-agentic-ga}

*FlowFuse Expert is our integrated AI assistant, in the website, the platform, and the immersive Node-RED editor.*

> Describe what you want to build, an OEE dashboard, an MES handover screen, a UNS topic mapping, and FlowFuse Expert assembles the flow on your workspace for you. With 2.31 this moves out of soft launch into an open beta: switched on for your team on FlowFuse Cloud, and enabled with a small configuration change on Self-Hosted Enterprise. No request needed.

Reviewer 3: @dimitrieh For self-hosted, they still need to request a token, right?

Author: @sumitshinde-84 yes. They need to reach out to us, though for new customers we want to enable this automatically. I'll adjust this.

cc: @Esmewieringa @MichaelBDavis

## Our team off-site in Greece

We spent part of this cycle together in Greece for a full-company off-site, resetting our roadmaps and how we run product. That is also why 2.31 is lighter on big features: a lot of this month's work is foundational.

<!-- PHOTO: add the off-site team photo here once the asset lands: ![The FlowFuse team in Greece](/blog/2026/06/images/offsite-team.jpg) -->

<hr style="margin: 3rem 0; border: 0; border-top: 1px solid #D1D5DB;">

For detailed breakdowns of each feature with additional visuals, visit our [changelog](/changelog/). For the complete list of everything included in FlowFuse 2.31, check out the [release notes](https://github.com/FlowFuse/flowfuse/releases).

If something in this release improves your workflow, or if there is still friction we can remove, please [share feedback or report issues regarding this release](mailto:contact@flowfuse.com?subject=Feedback%20on%202.31) with us.

## Try FlowFuse

### FlowFuse Cloud

The fastest way to get started is with FlowFuse Cloud.
[Get started for free]({% include "sign-up-url.njk" %}) and have your Node-RED instances running in minutes.

### Self-Hosted

> Run FlowFuse locally using [Docker](/docs/install/docker/) or [Kubernetes](/docs/install/kubernetes/).

Reviewer 2: @dimitrieh there are 3 CTAs. I'd recommend using the [CTA space](https://flowfuse.com/handbook/marketing/blog/#cta) for this. 

<img width="772" height="659" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/d8892798-ebf6-4eb4-b7a4-1e20201271b2" />
